.. _remote_access_to_data:

=====================
Remote access to data
=====================

.. admonition:: Video

   Watch this in our courses: `2022 February
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=raRQvKLTHpg&list=PLZLVmS9rf3nOKhGHMw4ZY57rO7tQIxk5V&index=18>`__,
   `2021 January
   <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=guZYMgwdP4Q&list=PLZLVmS9rf3nN_tMPgqoUQac9bTjZw8JYc&index=10>`__

The cluster is just one part of your research: most people are
constantly transferring data back and forth.  Unfortunately, this can
be a frustrating experience if you haven't got everything running
smoothly.  In this tutorial, we'll explain some of the main methods.
See the main :doc:`storage <storage>` tutorial first.


.. admonition:: Abstract

   * Data is also available from other places in Aalto, such as
     desktop workstations in some departments, shell servers, and
     https://vdi.aalto.fi.

   * Transferring data is available via ssh (the standard ``rsync``
     and ``sftp``)

   * Data can be mounted remotely using ssh (``sshfs``, from anywhere
     with ssh access) and SMB mounting on your own computer (within
     Aalto networks, Linux/mac: ``smb://data.triton.aalto.fi/PATH``,
     Windows: ``\\data.triton.aalto.fi\PATH`` and uses ``\``, ``PATH``
     could be ``work/USERNAME`` or ``scratch/DEPT/GROUPNAME``)


.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 0
  :class: table-align-top

  * * .. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/aaltoscicomp-graphics/master/figures/cluster-schematic/cluster-schematic-datamount.png
         :alt: Schematic of cluster with current discussion points highlighted; see caption or rest of lesson.

         Mounting data: on your machine, you have a view of the data
         directly on the cluster: there is only one copy.

    * .. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/aaltoscicomp-graphics/master/figures/cluster-schematic/cluster-schematic-datacopy.png
         :alt: Schematic of cluster with current discussion points highlighted; see caption or rest of lesson.

         Copying data: there become two copies that you have to manage.

.. highlight:: console



History and background
----------------------

Historically, ``ssh`` transfers have been the most common (which
includes ``rsync`` (recommended these days), ``scp``, ``sftp``, and
various other graphical programs that use these protocols) - and this
is still the most robust and reliable method.  There are other modern
methods, but they require other things.

There are two main styles of remote data access:

* **Transferring data** makes a new copy on the other computer.  This
  is generally efficient for large data.
* **Remote mounting** makes a view of the data on the other computer:
  when you access/modify the data on the other computer, it
  transparently accesses/modifies *in the original place without
  making a copy*.  This is very convenient, but generally slow.

  * We have this already set up for you from many computers at Aalto.



Data availability throughout Aalto
----------------------------------

Data is the basis of almost everything we do, and accessing it
seamlessly throughout Aalto is a great benefit.  Various other Aalto
systems have the data available.  However, this varies per department:
each department can manage its data as it likes.  So, we can't make
general promises about what is available where.

Linux shell server mounts require a valid Kerberos ticket (usually
generated when you log in). On long sessions these might expire, and
you have to renew them with ``kinit`` to keep going.  If you get a
permission denied, try ``kinit``.

Virtual desktop interface
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

VDI, `vdi.aalto.fi <https://vdi.aalto.fi>`__, is a Linux workstation
accessible via your web browser, and useful for a lot of work.  It is
not Triton, but has scratch mounted at ``/m/triton/scratch/``. Your
work folder can be access at ``/m/triton/scratch/work/USERNAME``. For
SCI departments the standard paths you have on your workstations are
also working ``/m/{cs,nbe}/{scratch,work}/``.

Shell servers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Departments have various shell servers, see below.  There isn't a
generally available shell server anymore.

NBE
~~~

On workstations, work directories are available at ``/m/nbe/work`` and
group scratch directories at ``/m/nbe/scratch/PROJECT/``, including
the shell server ``amor.org.aalto.fi``.

PHYS
~~~~

Directories available on demand through SSHFS. See the `Data
transferring
<https://wiki.aalto.fi/display/TFYintra/Data+transferring>`__ page at
PHYS wiki.

CS
~~

On workstations, work directories are available at ``/m/cs/work/``,
and group scratch directories at ``/m/cs/scratch/PROJECT/``.  The
department shell server is ``magi.cs.aalto.fi`` and has these
available.



Remote mounting
---------------

There are many ways to access Triton data remotely.  These days, we
recommending figuring out how to **mount** the data remotely, so that
it appears as local data but is accessed over the network.  This saves
copying data back and forth and is better for data security, but is
slower and less reliable than local data.

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/aaltoscicomp-graphics/master/figures/cluster-schematic/cluster-schematic-datamount.png
   :alt: Schematic of cluster with current discussion points highlighted; see caption or rest of lesson.

   Mounting data: on your machine, you have a view of the data
   directly on the cluster: there is only one copy.

Remote mounting using SMB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By far, remote mounting of files is the easiest method to transfer
files.  If you are not on the Aalto networks (wired, ``eduroam``, or
``aalto`` with Aalto-managed laptop), connect to the :doc:`Aalto VPN
</aalto/remoteaccess>` first.  Note that this is automatically done on
some department workstations (see above) - if not, request it!

The scratch filesystem can be remote mounted using SMB inside secure
Aalto networks at the URLs

.. tabs::

  .. group-tab:: Windows

    * scratch: ``\\data.triton.aalto.fi\scratch\``.
    * work: ``\\data.triton.aalto.fi\work\%username%\``.

    To access these folders:  To do the mounting, Windows Explorer →
    Computer → Map network drive → select a free letter.

  .. group-tab:: Mac

    * scratch: ``smb://data.triton.aalto.fi/scratch/``.
    * work: ``smb://data.triton.aalto.fi/work/USERNAME/``.

    To access these folders: Finder → Go menu item → Connect to server
    → use the URLs above.

  .. group-tab:: Linux

    * scratch: ``smb://data.triton.aalto.fi/scratch/``.
    * work: ``smb://data.triton.aalto.fi/work/USERNAME/``.

    To access these folders: Files → Left sidebar → Connect to server
    → use the URLs above. For other Linuxes, you can probably figure
    it out.  (It varies depending on operating system, look around in
    the finder)


From Aalto managed computers, you can use ``lgw01.triton.aalto.fi``
instead of ``data.triton.aalto.fi`` and it might auto-login.

Depending on your OS, you may need to use either your username
directly or ``AALTO\username``.

.. warning::

   In the future, you will only be able to do this from Aalto managed
   computers.  This remote mounting will really help your work, so we
   recommend you to request an Aalto managed computer (citing this
   section) to make your work as smooth as possible (or use
   vdi.aalto.fi, see below.


Remote mounting using sshfs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

``sshfs`` is a neat program that lets you mount remote filesystems via
ssh only.  It is well-supported in Linux, and somewhat on other
operating systems.  Its true advantage is that you can mount any
remote ssh server - it doesn't have to be set up specially for SMB or
any other type of mounting.  On Ubuntu an other Linuxes, you can mount
by "File → Connect to server" and using
``sftp://triton.aalto.fi/scratch/work/USERNAME``. This also works from
any shell server with data (see previous section).

The below uses command line programs to do the same, and makes the
``triton_work`` on your local computer access all files in
``/scratch/work/USERNAME``.  Can be done with other folders, too::

    $ mkdir triton_work
    $ sshfs USERNAME@triton.aalto.fi:/scratch/work/USERNAME triton_work

Note that ``ssh`` binds together many ways of accessing Triton (and
other servers), with a similar syntax and options.  Learning to use it
well is a great investment in your future.  Learn more about ssh on
:doc:`the ssh page </scicomp/ssh>` - if you set up a ssh config file,
it will work here, too!

For Aalto Linux workstation users: it is recommended that you mount
``/scratch/`` under the local disk ``/l/``. You should be able to
create the subfolder folder under ``/l/`` and point sshfs to that
subfolder as in the example here above.



Transferring data
-----------------

This section tells ways you can copy data back-and-forth between
Triton and your own computers.  This may be more annoying for
day-to-day work but is better for transferring large data.

.. figure:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AaltoSciComp/aaltoscicomp-graphics/master/figures/cluster-schematic/cluster-schematic-datacopy.png
   :alt: Schematic of cluster with current discussion points highlighted; see caption or rest of lesson.

   Copying data: there become two copies that you have to manage.


Version control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Don't forget that you can use version control (git, etc.) for your
code and other small files.  This way, you transfer to/from Triton via
a version control server (Aalto Gitlab, Github, etc).  Often, one
would develop locally (committing often of course), pull on Triton, do
whatever some minor development directly on Triton to make it work
there, then push back to the server.


Mount and copy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You know, you can do the network drive mounting (see previous
section), and copy files that way.



.. _rsync_data_transfer:

Using rsync
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. admonition:: Prerequisites

   To install rsync on windos please refer to :doc:`this guide </scicomp/rsynconwindows>`

Rsync is good for large files since it can restart interrupted
tranfsfers.  Use rsync for large file transfers.  ``rsync`` actually
uses the ssh protocol so you can ``rsync`` from anywhere you can
``ssh`` from. ``rsync`` is installed by default on Linux and Mac
terminals. On Windows machines we recommend using `GIT-bash
<https://gitforwindows.org/>`__.

While there are better places on the internet to read about rsync, it
is good to try it out to sychronise a local folder on your triton's
scratch. Sometimes the issue with copying files is related to group
permissions. This command takes care of permissions and makes sure
that all your local files are identical (= same MD5 fingerprint) to
your remote files::

    $ rsync -avzc -e "ssh" --chmod=g+s,g+rw --group=GROUPNAME PATHTOLOCALFOLDER USERNAME@triton.aalto.fi:/scratch/DEPT/PROJECTNAME/REMOTEFOLDER/

Replace the bits in CAPS with your own case. Briefly, ``-a`` tries to
preserve all attributes of the file, ``-v`` increases verbosity to see
what rsync is doing, ``-z`` uses compression, ``-c`` skips files that
have identical MD5 checksum, ``-e`` specifies to use ssh (not
necessary but needed for the commands coming after), ``--chmod`` sets
the group permissions to shared (as common practice on scratch project
folders), and ``--group`` sets the groupname to the group you belong
to (note that GROUPNAME == PROJECTNAME on our scratch filesystem).

If you want to just check that your local files are different from the
remote ones, you can run rsync in "dry run" so that you only see what
the command would do, without actually doing anything.::

    $ rsync --dry-run -avzc ...

Sometimes you want to copy only certain files. E.g. go through all
folders, consider only files ending with ``py``::

    $ rsync -avzc --include '*/' --include '*.py' --exclude '*' ...

Sometimes you want to copy only files under a certain size (e.g.
100MB)::

   $ rsync -avzc --max-size=100m ...

Rsync does NOT delete files by default, i.e. if you delete a file from
the local folder, the remote file will not be deleted automatically,
unless you specify the ``--delete`` option.

Please note that when working with files containing code or simple
text, git is a better option to synchronise your local folder with
your remote one, because not only it will keep the two folders in
sycn, but you will also gain version controlling so that you can
revert to previous version of your code, or txt/csv files.


Using sftp
~~~~~~~~~~

The *SFTP* protocol uses ssh to transfer files.  On Linux and Mac, the
``sftp`` command line program are the must fundamental way to do this,
and are available everywhere.

A more user-friendly way of doing this (with a nice GUI) is the
`Filezilla program <https://filezilla-project.org/>`__. Make sure you
are using `Aalto VPN
<https://www.aalto.fi/en/services/establishing-a-remote-connection-vpn-to-an-aalto-network>`__,
then you can put triton.aalto.fi as SFTP server with port 22.

With all modern OS it is also possible to just open your OS file
manager (e.g. Nautilus on Linux) and just put as address in the bar::

    sftp://triton.aalto.fi

If you are connecting from remote and cannot use the VPN, you can
connect instead to department machines like kosh.aalto.fi,
amor.org.aalto.fi (for NBE). The port is 22. *Note:* If you do not see
your shared folder, you need to manually specify the full path (i.e.
the folder is there, just not yet visible).



Exercises
---------

.. exercise:: RemoteData-1: Mounting your work directory

   Mount your work directory by SMB (or sshfs) and transfer a file to
   Triton. Note that for SMB, you must be connected to the Aalto VPN
   (from outside campus), or on ``eduroam``, the ``aalto`` *with Aalto
   laptop* (from campus).

.. exercise:: (advanced) RemoteData-2: rsync

   If you have a Linux or Mac computer, or have installed it on
   Windows, study the ``rsync`` manual page and try to transfer a
   file.



What's next?
------------

The next tutorial is about :doc:`how the cluster queuing system Slurm works <slurm>`.
